Welcome to the RStudio Enterprise Community Meetup.
I think it was a little delayed here,
so let me start over again.
Hi friends, thank you so much for joining us today.
Welcome to the RStudio Enterprise Community Meetup.
I'm Rachel calling in from a rainy Boston today.
If you've just joined now,
feel free to say hi through the chat window
and maybe where you're calling in from.
If this is your first time joining one of these sessions,
we do have them every Tuesday at noon Eastern time.
And so I'll share a calendar of all the upcoming events
in the chat in just a second here,
where you can add whole calendar or individual events
to your own calendar too.
This is a friendly and open meetup environment
for teams to share different use cases with each other
and teach lessons learned.
Together, we're all dedicated to making this an inclusive
and open environment for everyone,
no matter your experience, your industry or background.
During the event, you can also ask questions
on the platform that you are watching from.
You're also able to ask anonymous questions as well
through rstd.io slash meetup questions,
which I'll put on the screen here in just a second too.
But with all that, welcome.
Thank you so much for joining us.
I would love to pull Ryan up here on stage
and let me handle my little side panel here.
Hi, Ryan.
Ryan, thanks so much for joining us.
Ryan leads Veterans Affairs quantitative approach
to improving employee engagement,
primarily through feedback and related outcome data.
Thank you, Ryan, for sharing your experience.
Absolutely.
Thank you, Rachel.
And thank you all for the time.
So I'll talk about how we use Shiny and rstd.io Connect
at the Department of Veterans Affairs
for our executive dashboard project.
So as you probably know,
VA's mission, which of course I'm here to talk
about our work specifically, not VA more broadly.
VA's mission is to provide healthcare and benefits
and burial services for U.S. veterans.
And the mission of my office of NCOD
is to improve employee engagement in VA
so that those services can be provided most effectively.
We do that in the way that's most relevant here
through enterprise survey and data science services.
So some context for that work is that VA is quite large,
as you may know, 400,000 plus employees
from Manila to San Juan to Maine,
every kind of occupation you can think of,
hundreds of hospitals and clinics
and benefits offices and cemeteries.
So in contrast to that, my office is quite small.
Our headcount is about 50.
So on one hand, that's really exciting
because we can have a very outsized impact
and work in a very high leveraged way.
But it also means we have to punch way above our weight class
to have the kind of impact that we need to have.
So some of the tools and processes I can talk about today
are what help us do that.
So just a little bit of info about the data
that go into the application I'll show you,
and then we'll, of course, jump into the actual app.
The primary data source from surveys that we use
is something called the All-Employee Survey.
And every year, VA administers the AES to every employee,
very comprehensive.
It covers everything from engagement to burnout
to psychological safety, patient safety,
specific modules for specific occupations.
So there's between 70 and 120 questions
depending on what you do.
And it's our primary data source for organizational health.
And it's also one of the most important,
maybe in some ways the most important,
feedback mechanism that VA has
for hearing about how we can provide
better services to veterans.
It gets a great response rate.
So we have representative high-quality data,
about 70% response rate this year.
People feel like they can be honest because it's anonymous.
And the data go lots of places
into executives' performance plans
and get reported in important ways.
But from NCOD's perspective,
the most important purpose of the data
is for workgroup-level improvement.
So workgroup is just a group of five or 10 or 15 people
who work together on a day-to-day basis.
So for that improvement to happen,
first of all, of course,
workgroups need to have their data
and be able to discuss it and see what it's telling them
and strategize about how to improve
their day-to-day work life.
But for purposes today at the executive level,
of course, executives need to know what's going on.
Basically, they need to know where there are hotspots,
things to watch out for,
any trends that may be concerning or noteworthy.
And so the app and the briefing process that we use
helps get executives that level of data they need
in a quick way and also in a way that's very durable
and that they can use as a reference.
So we brief every executive team in VA,
which is about 300 teams,
2,000, probably closer to 2,500 individuals.
So for example, at a hospital,
the executive team would be the director,
a few service chiefs,
and maybe a few other people too.
So the top four, five, six, seven people at every site.
And we brief them directly from the dashboard
that I'll show you in just a second.
So we used to use giant PowerPoints and big Excel files
and those were great as references,
but as you can imagine, not terribly compelling
when you have the kind of data we have
at the scale that we have it.
So the dashboard's been a huge improvement for us.
Just a few final points about the app itself.
Flat CSV files are our data source,
so no fancy APIs or databases.
And the displays are also pretty simple as you'll see.
We mostly use bar charts, line graphs, and tables.
And I note this here because if you're like me,
you see some of the really sophisticated and cool apps
that other people make
that do bring in lots of other data sources
and have lots of cool plugins and so on.
And it's easy, at least for me,
to think that you have to do that kind of stuff
for it to be useful.
So for what it's worth,
we've gotten a lot of mileage
out of pretty simple backends.
The other thing you'll see that we put a lot of work into
is for the interface to look relatively coherent,
hopefully, and for it to be predictable.
Because with the audience we have,
it's just not tenable to expect 2,500 executives
to learn some idiosyncratic interface
or deal with fiddly UI issues.
So it needs to be very predictable,
very polished, and also pretty responsive
because these briefings last for 60 minutes
and that's a lot of time, but also it's not.
So even if we had a few minutes of cumulative lag
waiting for things to update or to calculate,
that's a decent percentage of our total time.
So those are some considerations
that we've had to deal with while building this application.
I'll try to pause for questions periodically,
but feel free to interrupt with any questions
or points of elaboration you'd like me to make.
So with that, I will change screens, hopefully.
I was just gonna say, I'll pop in here
when there are some questions too,
but just wanted to remind everyone
that you can ask either on LinkedIn,
if you're watching there, or on YouTube Live.
Also, there's the Slido link for anonymous questions too.
And so one of the considerations
that if you do this at scale, you'll run into is bandwidth.
So we have a relatively large backend server,
but when you have hundreds of people
coming at the same time to it,
it's gonna sometimes be slow.
So hopefully we get a pretty good response now
because actually the briefings are going on right now.
So I came from one this morning,
I've got one this afternoon.
So there's a lot of traffic on this platform right now.
So the first thing you see when you go to the link
that we give to all executives,
and I'll just make it a full screen,
VA's numbers come up by default.
So one of the good things about doing it in this way
is that it's really easy to be very transparent
with all the data that we have
because anybody in VA can pick data for any group in VA.
So there's no kind of compartmentalizing the information.
Everything is fully available for anyone to see.
The other thing that that makes it very easy to do
is to go into deep dives on specific groups
that may be of interest during a particular briefing.
So if we're briefing one of the undersecretaries,
for example, who are over lots of different facilities
and they have a question about a specific facility,
we can go right to that facility and this input
and everything else updates with that facility's data.
So it's a great way to be responsive in real time
versus having to take questions
and then come back with additional reports.
So I'll go to our demo page, which has fictitious data.
So it's representative of what a facility would see,
but the numbers are not real.
So as I go through this, I'll show you what we have
and I'll try to focus more on the app itself
than the data points, which is kind of backwards
from how the briefings would go, of course,
but I'm happy to talk about any of it.
So feel free to break in with questions
on the app itself or the data.
So the first thing you may notice
is that it doesn't look like the standard Shiny app
that you get by default.
It's a Bootstrap page running Bootstrap 5
with the bslib package.
So that gives us a good bit of flexibility
because then we can use Bootstrap's native row column layout
to get exactly what we want.
It's also, so you'll notice the picture, for example,
in the top right.
So for every facility, we find a story about that facility
from, that's been published by that facility itself,
that talks about some service that's been provided
or some efforts that have been undertaken
that are what the data we have tried to promote.
So in the case here, this is the picture
from the Chicago VA.
And a lot of VAs do this, and it's really cool.
They partner with local community service organizations,
veterans organizations, and so on.
And they'll do things like drive-through baby showers.
So if you're a veteran and your family just had a baby
and you need some help, you can show up
and drive through basically a big tunnel
where they load you up with everything
that you need in your car.
And if you haven't seen the kind of impact
that that kind of service and work can have,
it's really, really effective.
So we try to tie in what's actually going on
on the ground to the data we have
just to build a connection.
There's a story that's linked behind the picture
and I'll not click on it now
just to save the back and forth,
but the actual stories are linked here as well.
So this is a picture of the Chicago VA
are linked here as well.
There's a video that we put behind a,
it's an embedded YouTube video.
It's in an iframe, and it just sets the tone
for why we do the survey in the first place.
It's not really about tracking a bunch of numbers.
It's about changing how people experience
their day-to-day work at VA.
And then throughout, you'll also see
a red, yellow, green color heuristic by default
to indicate when a score is good or okay, or not so great.
Of course, some people can't see that,
so it's easy to change to an alternate palette
or to pick a custom palette that anybody can see.
The trick with something like this
that I learned the hard way
is you wanna bring in the color scheme
as late in the reactive chain as you can
so that if someone changes the color scheme,
you're not refiring all the reactives
that would do data manipulations
that don't need to be redone.
You wanna just re-skin the graphs, basically.
And it's tedious to do that after you do it the other way,
so you wanna make sure to do that early on.
So the first thing we show people
are some key numbers that correspond
to important things that VA leaders care about.
The response rate, obviously, is important
because you need to know how representative your data are.
Data sharing and data use refer to the extent
that people at that organization say
they've seen their data and that it's been used
to improve their day-to-day work life.
So if you do some back-of-the-envelope math,
the VA score on this is 42%.
So we're talking about 200,000 people
who say that this specific survey has made improvements
and has led to improvements in how they are able
to provide their service to veterans.
Everything from getting pharmacy medications
turned around quicker from prescription to administration,
lots of employee wellness activities,
lots of governance to do with nursing groups.
So the places that groups go once they start talking
about how they feel about their work
and what can be done better
are usually really, really impactful.
And that's why we try to push the data down as low
in the organization as we can.
Best places to work is an overall job satisfaction measure.
So each of these tiles have a color
that corresponds to the valence of that score.
And they also have a click event
that shows a drill down in a few different ways.
And this is one of the things we try to do
that's consistent across the different data displays we have.
There's a quick takeaway that you can get just at a glance,
and then there's more that you can get one level down,
sometimes two, if you really want to.
So it's great for a briefing
because you can kind of read the room
and see where people want to spend their time.
So in this case, we have scores for the facility,
its region, the entire healthcare sector of VA,
and then up to VA overall, just for some context,
for this year and for last year.
So everything we show has some comparison data,
and everything we show also has
the change score since last year.
Peers shows how the site stacks up
against other sites in its region.
So these are other VA facilities
in the same region as Boston.
So people often want to know what rank they are,
how they stack up.
This gets those questions out of the way early on,
so they can focus on the within-facility data
that's usually more impactful.
Direct reports is one level down in the org chart.
And I should say, too, all these tables and graphs
are sorted by default.
So there's a useful sort based on the scale.
So you don't have to kind of orient yourself
to where the high scores are, or the low scores.
They filter automatically.
And that's a small thing, but when you have so much data,
the usability gain you get from that is really important.
The colors correspond to statistical testing of groups.
So green is better than a comparison group
or improved since last year.
Red, of course, is the reverse.
And here we can look back to 2018 to get the trajectory.
So each of these has that same ability.
I'll spare you the details with going through each one,
but that's the UI piece here.
Each of these also has a breakout
that corresponds to the org chart.
So response rate's chosen by default,
but I'll select best places to work.
So every organization, as I mentioned,
is mapped all the way down to the very small team level,
five, 10, 15 people.
So this is a very intuitive display for people,
especially for executives,
because it matches the schema of the organization
that they already have.
The color, of course, corresponds to the value of the score.
There's a scale up here with VA for reference.
Again, these numbers, just to reiterate,
these numbers are fictitious,
but representative of the kind of variance that you see.
So they stop at two levels down by default,
just because hospitals are big places.
But if you want to see everything,
then you can uncheck that quick map toggle.
And now there's a lot,
because again, it's a big organization,
but you can get a quick visual triage
of the entire organization.
So you can imagine as a director, as a service chief,
you can really start to see just quickly
where some of the hotspots and bright spots
are within your organization.
The additional layer of detail here
is accessed by clicking on the dot.
So if I wanted to click on,
I'm just picking a group at random here,
I can see a drill down into their specific data
and also a scrambled supervisor email here as mapped locally.
Easy to follow up with people this way.
I did see a question.
I'm trying to watch the chat,
but there are lots of questions.
I saw a question about the URL of the site.
This is internal to VA,
so nobody outside of VA could access it.
That's why there's no URL available.
I can help ask some of the questions too, Ryan.
Yeah, please.
Okay, awesome.
Yeah, I was just popping in there.
I didn't want to interrupt the flow though.
One of the questions that people asked on Slido was,
I'm new to R and RStudio
and my employer would like their data source
refreshed daily used in their scripts.
Is Shiny the recommended method?
So we don't do a lot of that, honestly,
because we have sort of large single efforts
versus kind of continuous incoming data.
I've seen really effective use cases for that.
I think it depends a lot on the way the data are stored
and to the extent that you can access it
through some sort of API or database.
Thank you.
Another question that came up earlier was,
is there any concern from IT regarding the use of R
and Shiny as the government traditionally uses SaaS?
Or is this true?
So there is concern.
There is inertia to overcome.
That's been a process.
You need, at least in my experience,
you need executive sponsorship to be able to say
why the ultimate outcome matters.
Because a lot of IT departments aren't going to care
about the details of this.
They care about security.
They care about maintainability.
So if you can get somebody at a level
that has sway with other IT leaders
to make them care and see the value,
then you can get more movement that way.
At least in VA, there's a really detailed process
to go through to get approved to be an app
and to be on, in our case, Azure.
There's a federal Azure space that we're on.
So we have to go through all that review,
which is slow, but you do get there eventually.
As a follow-up to that,
I love Hugh's comment in the chat.
Hugh said, this is amazing.
I work for VHA and this app is so much better
than how we used to get AES results.
You might need to help me on the acronyms here.
But what has been your experience with R and VA?
Thank you for the feedback.
It's been good, especially for local work.
So using it on your desktop is not an issue.
It takes an admin to install RStudio,
but that's typically not a problem.
To get on Azure and get connected
and then get stood up that way is,
I mentioned a pretty long process.
It took a couple of years.
There's a lot of contracting and IT
and related functions that have to be on the same page.
But I think it's doable.
We certainly did it.
It just did take a long time.
Can I ask you a follow-up to that?
If somebody is listening now and starting that process off,
what is something that you wish you knew about then
or something that was really helpful
to you through that process?
Something that is helpful that I wish I had done earlier
is do what I suggest that people do
and have an executive sponsor at a high level
that comes in to clear some of the obstacles.
It's like any bureaucracy, I think.
There are a lot more people who can say no than can say yes.
So you need to find that person who can really motivate people
to work on this project on your behalf.
Thank you.
I'll save some of the other questions
for a little bit later.
So I'll let you get back to the talk.
Thank you.
I did see one that's easy to take.
Limitations on VHA's Azure Space CRAN only or GitHub.
Haven't run into any limitations yet.
We try to stay with CRAN just for reliability reasons,
but no issues there.
Great. Thank you.
Sure.
So next, we talk about employee engagement and burnout,
and we do that in the same way
and with the same kind of interface
for both of those constructs,
just, again, for kind of predictability reasons.
So we talk about engagement in terms of the percent
of the organization that's engaged versus mixed
or kind of on the fence, you know,
maybe engaged sometimes but not always versus disengaged.
So the percents are easy to see here as a bar graph,
and then there's always a change score toggle
that's a plus minus.
The VA's dots are for reference again.
So if you're the director of Boston or whatever facility,
you can easily see where you fall against VA itself.
And then for every bar graph,
the one layer down here is you can click on the bar
and the little cursor kind of turns into a hand
to kind of cue you into that.
You can click on the bar and see a drill down
in a few different ways on that specific construct.
So for disengagement here, for example,
we see it by supervisory level
from most disengaged to least.
By service, a lot of variance here.
Again, fake data, the little banner at the top
gives that away, but you do see, you know, 40,
50, sometimes more points of variance at the service level.
Work group, again, those small teams of 5, 10, 15 people.
And you see the most variance here
because people who are in the same occupation
don't all have the same supervisor.
And so that's why there's usually more variance
at the work group level.
There's a supervisor effect, basically.
And then info will just have background
on that specific construct.
So this is nice because we've got, you know,
maybe 15, 20 people doing these briefings,
and some people are more or less familiar
with some of the details of the measures.
So it's a great reference for us,
but also for our executive audience
because we leave this app up all year,
and there's a lot of traffic throughout the year.
People come back to it.
And so you can easily remind yourself
what the details of that measure are.
For engagement and for burnout,
we also have hotspot and bright spot maps.
So these are like those maps you saw a minute ago,
but now we pull specific groups out
that have either a concerning score,
in the case of a hotspot,
or a good score in the case of a bright spot.
So these are groups where disengagement is at least 50%.
So you get that quick kind of triage,
and again, capitalizing on the schema of the org chart
that people are already familiar with.
Same thing for bright spots, engagement of 75%.
So in this case, for example,
it's useful to see the org chart display
because if you're the chief of social work,
you can see you've got three groups
that meet this threshold.
If it was the reverse and you had three groups
that met the disengagement threshold,
there'd be some sort of cluster effect likely.
So you'd want to know about that.
So burnout is next, and it's the same kind of display
for predictability reasons.
Here we talk about the percent of the organization
that has zero, one, two, or three
out of three symptoms of burnout at least once a week.
So the more symptoms you have, of course,
the more burned out you feel.
So the bar graphs show the scores,
the dots for reference for VA overall,
the drill downs by clicking on the bar.
We have free text themes here as well.
So in the survey that this data comes from,
people can also leave free text comments,
and we theme those and report them out verbatim as well.
We bring in the themes here just as a kind of an idea
of what's top of mind for people when they're prompted
to say something about their workplace.
So as you can probably imagine in healthcare,
especially now, burnout is top of mind for a lot of folks.
So you see that quantitatively
and also qualitatively in the comments.
Hotspot and bright spot maps again.
And then we have two questions,
a lot of bright spots here in this fake set.
We have two comments about COVID,
or two questions about COVID rather.
Extra professional stress because of COVID
and extra personal stress because of COVID.
And the scale is from none to extreme,
so you can see the distribution there.
And then I'll spare you the detail again,
but you can click on the bar
and see the same drill downs as you've seen so far.
Any questions before I jump to the next section?
Yes, there are a few other questions
coming in from YouTube and LinkedIn.
One was, can you touch upon performance,
giving multiple users using the app simultaneously?
So we have a, it's a 16 core, 64 gig server,
and we can handle about 100 people at the same time.
That's across a few applications though,
and some are more RAM heavy than this is,
although this is still pretty heavy.
There are huge data sets that go into this
and we try to cut them down
and do as much pre-work as we can,
but there's no way around some of it.
So we do okay with 100 at that size server.
You can play with the settings and connect
how eager versus unwilling it is
to spin up a new session for incoming users.
So you can have more people piled onto the same process
or you can have more processes.
It's some experimentation.
There's also shiny cannon.
I think that's the search term you want to use
to do some testing, but that's at least our experience.
Thank you.
Another question that was over on Slido
that I see has been upvoted a few times was,
was the UI all done with BSLib
or did you also incorporate JavaScript and CSS?
It's, the base is BSLib and there's a lot of custom CSS.
Yeah.
Not so much JavaScript.
I think the only script I can think of offhand
is what toggles it to be full screen
to remove the browser noise at the top.
So not a lot of JavaScript, but a lot of CSS.
Yeah.
Thank you.
And this question I think was shared
in a few different places, but it was,
can you either share code with us
or give general guidance on where to learn the click
on like drill down interface function?
Yeah, the, so the, the maps, I'll start at the top.
The maps are from, let me go back up here.
These maps are using collapsible tree.
It's like, that's the package name.
So there's a, there's a shiny binding
that gives you the input.
So you can use that to generate a modal
that has the, the information for the thing
that was clicked on.
So that's how to do it here.
For bar graphs, these are all done with Plotly
and there's similarly, there's a, there's a binding
for shiny, there's a click binding that you can use
to reference the, for example, the row number
of the dataset that corresponds to the bar
that was clicked on.
So it's a little finicky to set up,
but once you get it, it's pretty reliable.
That's, that's how we do it.
Great. Thank you.
I was trying to find the links very quickly
and share them in the chat as well,
but I can also share those with the recording.
I see somebody had asked
if the session will be available later.
And yes, right after the session,
the recording goes up at the same YouTube live link.
Okay. One other question.
I see that Yanis asked,
how could I integrate an R Markdown file
which could export more than one interactive plot
at once in a shiny application?
I don't know. Haven't done it.
Best of luck though.
We can, we could try and find some other resources too,
or if anybody has ideas,
feel free to share them in the chat.
And then one other, sorry, one other question.
Eugene asked to clarify, how do you serve the dashboard?
Is it on RStudio Connect or?
Yeah, we, so we have a Connect instance that's on Azure.
And so we just get a link for this page
and send it out to everybody.
Yeah. I see Matthew had a question too about,
it's anonymous, but it can be attributed to the manager.
Yeah. So the intent of this,
and this takes a lot of work
and sort of institutional familiarity
to actually make it stick,
but we've been doing this for, you know, 15 years or so now.
So we've got some of that.
The purpose of this is purely developmental.
The only thing that's in performance plans
has to do with using the data,
not about getting a specific score or anything like that.
So yeah, by mapping it on the org chart,
there is like, you can see who supervises what group,
but virtually no one uses it for that purpose
because the data wouldn't be useful then if we did that.
Like as soon as you create a standard
that's going to be mandated
or you create a bar that has to be cleared,
then people find ways to clear it,
even if that may not be how they actually feel.
Thanks, Ryan.
Good question.
So the next section is a different kind of display,
just a table format here for DE&I data.
The cool thing here, though, is the comparisons we do,
not really the display itself.
So we've got four DE&I questions,
and those are linked above,
but we use those and also three overall experience indicators.
Best places to work, engagement, and burnout.
And for every demographic,
we test the minority against the majority
and then shade where the minority
is lower than the majority.
So if you see a lot of red, basically,
it means that in this hypothetical organization,
people who you see have red cells
are reporting more discrepant experiences
on the topics you see the red cells for
than the majority categories for their demographic.
So for disability status, for example,
people who said they do have a disability,
21% discrimination versus 11% for people
who say they don't have a disability.
And there are two pages because we have so many demographics
that would make too big of a table to show it at once,
but as you can imagine,
this is very interesting for executives to see.
And there's also change scores, again, available here.
And for those, the comparison is every group to itself last year
rather than to its majority.
And if they improve, then they get green
or whatever you've changed the good color to be.
If they went down, they get red.
The next piece of...
There's three main pieces of DE&I here.
The next piece is about intersectionality
because, of course, one demographic
doesn't describe anybody very well.
So here you can pick patterns of demographics
and see how people feel about those same measures,
but who meet multiple demographic conditions.
Sorted so that it's high to low discrimination.
And, of course, the coloring is a basic heat map scheme.
And finally, we have hotspots again here
for those four questions.
So for each of those questions,
we can pull, again, those groups out of the org chart
and see where some concerning scores may be.
We don't do bright spots here
because there's no way to know
whether a group is being very equitable
and inclusive and so on
or whether it may just not be a diverse group
in the first place.
So bright spots are the ones where you can see
so bright spots wouldn't really work well here,
but hotspots do.
Second to last data piece we have here,
priorities and turnover intent.
So priorities show what people in the group say
they most want to work on over the next year.
So we can see that prioritization,
same click events as before,
same thing for turnover intent,
which, as you can imagine, if you're an executive,
you want to know who's thinking of leaving
and where you may have some staffing shortages,
and then what's pushing people away.
So the reasons people who said they want to leave
gave for wanting to leave in the first place.
The last data piece here has to do with just culture.
So if you're not familiar with that term,
the idea is just that people need to feel,
especially in safety-critical applications like healthcare,
need to feel like they can speak up
and say when something's not right,
but also that there are standards
and they're transparent and equitable and so on.
So you want to be up here in this top right area,
and you don't want to be in this off-diagonal.
So this is a plotly scatterplot.
The background colors, of course,
just kind of cue you into where the desirable range of scores
for these issues are.
And you can change the questions to get different views.
You can search and see, for example,
all nursing groups at once if you wanted to.
And then you can also toggle between work groups,
which is the default, and between occupations,
because, again, those are similar but specific.
And finally, there's a table below that has these same scores.
But you can also, if you wanted to see the lowest groups all at once,
you can drag a lasso,
and the table updates to only show those groups,
and then you can download this table easily to Excel.
The tables are using the DT package.
So you get the sortability and the downloading and so forth
kind of by default,
or at least very easily through that interface.
Executives usually want to recognize groups that do well,
so it's easy to get additional resources we make available here
or to see a table that's sorted automatically by default
just to make it easy to do that.
And then finally, we have just a bunch of extra resources
that people have gotten used to seeing in VA,
extra reports, the data stores,
another app that's on Connect that we made
that makes it really easy to pull specific data
in dataset form versus in report form,
other dashboards and tools and videos and so on.
The bookmark button is great if you're using Connect
because, or I think Shiny Apps does it also.
This will give you a custom URL
that remembers all of your input selections.
So if you're the director of Boston, let's say,
and you've gotten to this point
and you've set up the page the way you want,
you can hit bookmark and then save a URL
that will preload all those same selections for you next time.
So it's easy to come back and kind of pick up where you left off.
Hotspot and Brightspot downloads
just give you Excel files of those groups.
And then this is just a basic bootstrap accordion.
So that's the app.
Happy to talk about it more or any piece of it more,
but that's what I had to show you.
Thank you so much, Ryan.
This is amazing.
I see a lot of people commenting in the chat
that are impressed with your plots
and the app in general as well.
Let me jump over to Slido
and see some of the other anonymous questions too.
One question was,
what did you use to create the tables in the app?
Was it DT?
DT, yeah.
DT, okay.
Yeah, DT.
Awesome.
Another was, how long did it take to get this app up and running?
We had a previous version of it,
so it's hard to say because a lot of the backend
was in various stages of completion.
I'd say a month, maybe.
It's been a while and it's hard.
You don't track the hours as you go.
I'd say a month probably of solid work
to get it where it is now.
Yep, awesome.
Another was, if this is an annual survey,
how much time or months are dedicated
to the various steps of analysis and UI design and reporting?
Yeah, so the survey this year went out in June.
It was open for most of June.
We do most of it.
We don't collect the data ourselves for a variety of reasons.
There's a vendor who collects the data for us.
We get the data from them early July
and we started briefings August 29th.
So there's a lot of analysis that goes on,
data cleaning and building additional reports
that I haven't shown you and building this.
So it's maybe 45 or so business days of development time.
And then throughout the rest of the year,
the team that I'm on and me will spend
maybe 10, 15% of our time on improving it for next year,
filling in some of the gaps or taking out some of the hacks
we had to do at the last minute.
That's great.
Maybe somebody else just asked,
I can't copy it over quick enough.
But they asked, what did the process of designing the UI look like?
It's so clean, but there's so much information in there.
Do you have specific expertise weigh in?
Trial and error.
We have a few executives we partner with
and kind of bounce ideas off of.
It doesn't mean we build it exactly to their specs
because you do have your own theories of presentation
and what's effective and what's not,
but there is that feedback.
The overall aesthetic is based on Microsoft's Fluent design language.
So if you Google like Microsoft Fluent,
it'll show you their style guide.
So it's easy to, well, not easy,
but it's possible to use CSS to replicate some of that.
And this matches roughly sort of the Microsoft's corporate-y vibe
that some of our other enterprise-level applications have.
So to an executive who isn't checking all these apps all the time,
it looks familiar and seems credible.
So that's the point of the aesthetic we have here.
That's awesome.
A question that I had was,
how has the use of the app in these executive briefing sessions
changed the conversation
or maybe changed some of the work that the team's doing?
I think it drives a lot of the work the team does
and certainly changes it from what it used to be.
So you could imagine the alternative to this would be,
you know, a 200-slide PDF or PowerPoint.
And at that level of detail,
you're really only taking away the site scores overall.
You can't focus on where the hot spots and bright spots are, for example,
because there's just so much.
So it becomes an issue of support, you know,
in specific areas for specific topics,
rather than just sort of letting the data kind of wash over you
and having a vague impression of how people feel.
That's the main difference.
From the bottom-up side, I mentioned a few,
but the things people are able to do
as a result of these conversations are really remarkable.
Backlog reductions and claims,
better patient handoffs between different care teams and facilities.
Others are more lighthearted.
There's just so many things people do.
I see Jim asked, I realize, a similar question, too.
And it was, what is the return on investment for the VA?
It's a lot. It's hard to quantify, as you can imagine.
You can't put a dollar amount easily on something like,
you know, smoother patient handoffs
or better communication on your team.
Some of the things we quantified had to do with
claims reduction backlogs of, you know, 5%, 10%,
which are, you know, at the scale that we have is a lot.
Savings from duplicative processes across different teams
that maybe didn't know about it before,
but they start talking and see that they've both got this ready.
So, yeah, there's not one number,
but if there was, I think it would be quite high.
Great. Thank you.
I see one other question that just came through on Slido was,
do you put this shiny app behind any sort of user authentication,
like Okta?
No, but that sort of happens for us
because we're on the federal cloud.
So to get to it, you have to be on VA's network, basically.
You have to be in our active directory.
But beyond that, no, it's open to anybody in VA.
Great. Thank you.
One other question I had is,
if somebody is watching this right now
and hoping to be able to create an app like this
and is just getting started,
what would you recommend for them in learning Shiny?
That's a good question.
I would say take it slow, be incremental.
If you pick some,
pick your own sophisticated application that you may have seen.
If you try to do that right away,
it's probably not going to work and be frustrating.
So for me, I try to get everything on the screen
and then do the UI.
So sort of like how Markdown breaks down the content
versus the markup.
I just want to get the data on the screen
and then I come back and make a formatting pass
and you revise and iterate.
So persistence is kind of a boring answer,
but that's my answer.
And figuring out how to Google things well
is a big part of it, too.
Yeah. What did this app look like in its first stages?
Not good.
A lot of the data was there.
It was a lot slower.
So I mentioned speed as something that's important.
Taking another run through the backend
and focusing on speed was really important.
If you have a lot of data,
I haven't found anything faster than data.table.
I think there may be a tidyverse wrapper package for that,
but if you need things to happen fast,
then rdata.table is the way to go.
Yeah. So how did it look before?
It was more of a default bootstrap-y type look
and it didn't fit well on different screen sizes,
wasn't mobile-friendly,
so this will reorient itself if you're on a mobile device
to at least display usably well.
So it was much more rudimentary before.
Did you just hit that point
where you're frustrated with the 200-page PowerPoint,
or how did you make the switch over?
It was frustration personally
and sort of in aggregate across our office
because we could just tell.
You sort of know that you're not getting people
exactly what they need at that level of detail
with that huge of a presentation,
but getting to something that could actually scale for us
is really important because we have 50 people
versus 420,000.
So we do reports in Flex Dashboard for every site,
so figuring out how to do that opened up some doors.
We do single-page PDFs for every workgroup,
so 30,000 PDFs.
Just figuring out how to do it at scale
was really the barrier for us.
We knew for a while we could do better,
but just needed that toolbox to be in place for us.
I want to make sure I didn't miss anybody's questions,
so if I did from earlier,
please feel free to just copy and paste it again
into YouTube or LinkedIn or Slido.
I think I've seen everything over on Slido,
but just want to double-check.
Ryan, for other government or public sector employees
who are trying to make the case for open-source technologies
or being able to use R and Python,
I know you said finding an executive sponsor
was really helpful,
but is there other advice that you have, too?
Yeah, and this gets to someone else's question
about ROI as well.
If you can get contractors,
if you can get contractors to price you out
what this looks like for them to do,
then the ROI becomes quite clear.
We've had estimates for 100,000-plus for every site,
so when you have a few hundred sites,
you're talking dozens of millions of dollars.
Compared to, I think we have
a 350-person License Connect contract,
so the ROI there,
just in terms of replacement cost, is quite high.
If you can show that, then that's one option.
If it's being done, then they're probably paying more for it
than it would cost to make in-house.
I would say make sure you go through
your organization's IT process from the beginning,
even though it's going to be painful
and you're going to want to lean on that executive
to get you around certain barriers.
Make sure you're still checking all the boxes,
because when it comes time to maintain your system
or if the maintenance contractor changes,
there are all sorts of things that can happen,
and then you fall through the cracks.
Or maybe your sponsor moves on
and then you have to get funding again.
So do it slowly but the right way, I think,
versus trying to reach for that
kind of skip to the front of the line method,
even though it's attractive.
Thank you. I see one question I...
Oh, it just disappeared.
One question I think I missed earlier was
someone asked, have you looked at Arrow or Parquet
instead of Data.table?
I know the term Arrow.
I haven't done any more looking into it than that
because Data.table's been fast enough for us.
But I know there are newer alternatives, yeah.
I think they're in some of the Data.table benchmarks
that I saw last.
Cool.
One other follow-up question on that example you said
of going through the IT process very early.
How did you build relationships with the IT team?
And is it centrally managed by IT now?
Sort of.
So there's a more central decision-making body
and sort of a more distributed implementation body
is sort of the rough lay of the land.
You start to at least get name recognition with folks
and then depending on where your organization is positioned,
you may have additional overlap with some IT functions.
Like we have a few other things we do that put us on IT's radar.
So they knew a little bit about us
and it wasn't like we're a complete stranger
coming into them.
And to be fair to them also, at least for us,
I know other agencies look different,
but the scale of VA IT, like us coming with this,
is sort of like asking a shipyard to build a kayak.
It's sort of in the ballpark of the thing they do,
but it's just such a different scale
and it's not related directly to patient care.
It's not a benefits processing system.
So it's a little bit outside their immediate concern.
So being understanding of their reality too,
I think is important.
Showing some empathy and just being persistent
really is the best advice I can give.
Great, thank you.
One last question I have for you before we go.
I know Hugh had commented in here who works for the VA as well.
I was curious, do you have some sort of like data science community
or like user group internally?
I think there are a couple.
We have a Teams channel of our users.
It's fairly decentralized as far as I can tell.
There are different offices that have their own teams
that focus on their own functions.
So there's not, at least not that I'm connected to,
there's not a large centralized data science in VA organization.
Let me double check once more,
see if there are any other questions.
Thank you for letting us throw all these questions at you.
Oh, for sure.
I don't see any others,
but really appreciate you sharing the app with us.
It's amazing and so cool to see the impact
that it's had in the organization as well.
If people do want to get in touch with you at some point after,
is LinkedIn the best way to stay in touch?
Yeah, LinkedIn is okay.
I'm not active.
I don't check it very often,
but I guess I'll get the notification if someone messages me.
So that's fine.
The first page of my slides, if you have that,
my email is linked behind my name.
It's just ryan.derrickson.va.gov.
So feel free to reach out there too.
Awesome.
Well, thank you so much, Ryan.
Really appreciate it.
Of course.
Thank you all.
Have a great rest of the day, everybody.
We'll see you next week.